Perfect. Hello, everyone. I might need to take a selfie because they're not going to
believe me when I get back. So people like testing, obviously, and they know. I used
to do a video because they're freaking not going to believe me. So apparently, people
know what open telemetry is and what testing is. And yeah, I was not expecting this to
be good. So you're going to go out on Twitter. That's for sure. But yeah, anyway, let's
just take a second to welcome our new guests in. Perfect. Perfect. Yeah, this went from
fun to stressful really quickly. But yeah, so let me begin. For the next 20 or so minutes,
I'll be talking about observability driven development with open telemetry. So a lot
of complicated words, a lot of stuff that's going to be happening, and a lot of things
I need to explain for you as testers and how you can get started with this new thing of
being ODD instead of TDD. So first, a quick rundown of who I am. I'm running DevRel at
TraceTest, which is a new tool, new open source tool that we're building for trace-based testing.
I'll obviously explain all of that later on. But you're wondering, what am I, DevRel person,
doing at an open source conference? Because I successfully failed a startup that was doing
online education. So I was from there, went into education. And because we're basically
educators in DevRel, I was like, maybe, maybe, you know, I write shitty code, I can maybe
be good at something like talking. So I figured that might be a good career shift. But I've
also been helping build open source DevTools for five or so years. So it's pretty natural
for me to be here. So enough about that. You probably think that I know what I'm talking
about. Let's keep it rolling. There are four main topics. So remember these four topics
that we will cover in the next 20 or so minutes. And that's first, we'll talk about the pain
of testing microservices. It's a horrible, horrible thing. And we'll also talk about
TDD and how integration testing is really hard. We're all doing it. It's terrible. It's
hard. But we're still doing it. And then in the last two parts, we'll talk about observability
driven development, how it can help. And then we'll show a code example, a hands on example
of how you can do it as well. So I want you to take something home with you after this
20 minute talk and actually start doing it yourself. So from the beginning, from the
top down, let's talk about the pain of testing microservices. So first, the biggest issue
is that you have no way of knowing where your HTTP transaction fails. You don't know. You
can test an API endpoint, you get a response back, but it might be task failed successfully.
You never really know if you have a row of microservices behind that initial service.
So that's something you can track. You can track and test how these microservice to microservice
communications happen. And of course, the hardest thing, what we all really love to
hate is mocking. It's really hard. It's really, really hard. So the solution that we propose
is that we go into doing something called observability driven development, which means
that you're using distributed traces as the test assertions. So you're already using your
underlying trace infrastructure to run your tests. And now because this is a testing bedroom,
you might not know what tracing is. LightStep has a very nice definition of it, and they
say that distributed tracing refers to methods of observing requests as they propagate through
a distributed system, which means that if you have a distributed system on the left,
you have services that communicate with each other. And on the right, you can see that
that entire distributed trace is split into different spans. A span is the smallest unit
of a distributed test. So a span can be, it can be a timestamp. It can be a database interaction
or database statement. It can be HTTP codes. It can be objects that you generate in your
custom instrumentation itself. So they are literally the smallest form or part of a distributed
trace. The distributed system we'll be talking about today, so the samples we will be talking
about is very simple. We have two services with a mock database connection. Just to simplify
this whole architecture, we will be using this to explain how distributed tracing works
and how you run observability-driven development on such a system. Now, just a code sample,
because this is JavaScript, the only language I really know, not that well, this is what
a trace would look like. You're setting the span, you're adding attributes, and then you're
ending the span. So this is the code representation of what we have over here. So just remember
that for now, and we'll get into more details as we progress. So the visual key, or the
visual layout of a distributed span would look like this. This is taken from the Trace
Test app, but this is any, like any distributed span looks like this, where you have your
distributed trace, and you can see all of the spans within it. And if you drill into
one particular span, you can see, okay, so here are all of the attributes that this span
has. It can be available, Book ID, the check, and the parent ID. There's a lot of different
attributes you have in every span. So the next topic I do want to cover, we have all
the basics down. We know why it's hard. We need to figure out why integration testing
and TDD really need help. Everybody knows about the red-green feedback loop. It's awesome.
It's great. We like it. We don't need to change it. But integration tests are hard. Integration
tests are the kicker, where they need access to services and infrastructure. That's the
hard part. You need to set up different triggers. You need to access databases. You need to
set up environment variables. You need to set up authentication. All of those things
that everybody hates doing. And of course, you can track which part of the microservice
chain failed, which means that you're writing 90% of your code just as plumbing, just to
make sure that the test will run. 10% is actually writing the test, writing the test case, and
actually getting value from your TDD process. So here's what a traditional integration test
would look like. You have all of your setup. Again, this is JavaScript. It can be any language.
You have your setup, a bunch of modules, a bunch of setup, a bunch of plumbing, and then
you have more plumbing because you need to mock something. Then you have even more plumbing
because you have to figure out how to run this custom freaking syntax that has nothing
to do with any language, really. You just have to learn it. So it's a lot of stuff you
have to know before you actually run tests. If you compare that to a trace-based test,
you say, here's my URL. Here's my method. This is what I'm asserting against. That's
it. No complications, no plumbing, no nothing. It just points to the trace, the trace span
you want to target. You have your assertion and it's done. So this is why I think observability-driven
can help our testing process where, obviously, we need to explain what ODD is. The main thing
that I think is important to know is that you need to write your code and your observability
instrumentation in parallel. So the same way you do the red-green process for TDD, in ODD,
you write your trace spans and you write your code and your features in parallel, which
is good first thing because in production that helps your DevOps people when they have
to troubleshoot, but it's also helping you write better code. ODD is really powerful
because first and foremost, of course, you're not testing mocks. Nothing is artificial.
You're not creating black boxes. You're literally testing data from the traces in the real environment.
So you can spin up your system, get traces from the system and test on those traces.
Of course, it works with all of your existing open telemetry-based distributed tracing.
So if you have tracing enabled or if you want to enable it, it's really simple nowadays,
it will just work. And then from the ODD definition, we need to figure out what trace-based testing
is here. So you basically add assertions against span values and that's what determines whether
the test has failed or the test has passed. It's really straightforward. So you're not
just testing against the API response, you're actually testing against the whole distributed
trace your system generates. So unlike postman, where you trigger a test, you get something
back and then you're asserting on that response, you're literally testing and running assertions
against the entire distributed trace. Really, really cool.
Now let's go into some practice. How do you do observability driven development? Well,
you do trace tests because that's the open source tool we're building, shocker. But what's
important about trace tests is fully open source, 100% open source CNCF project and
it uses open telemetry trace spans as assertions. Very straightforward. Of course, it does work
with any existing tracing solution you might have. You can use vendors, you can use open
source tools, you can use whatever. If you have tracing in your system, it'll just work.
Also what's important is it doesn't matter if you're a QA engineer, if you're a backend
developer, if you're a DevOps person, it'll just work. You have tools for everybody, Web
UI, CLI, whatever you want, whatever you need, it's there for you.
And then why I think it's powerful, you're not running artificial tests, you're testing
against real data and obviously you have a tool belt that you're really used to. You
can run test suites by chaining tests together, have transactions where the normal, whether
the normal, the standard way you're running integration tests is you have a setup, you're
connecting to a database, you're running an insert, you're checking if the insert works,
you're deleting that whole path, that environment and that's what we provide as well. You can
set that whole transaction up through the UI. So it's literally what you're used to,
but better. You always have test environments as well, which is a very big thing because
you can have one set environment for your Dev, for your QA, for your prod, for your
whatever. So it's very, very flexible in that way as well.
Obviously, I'm going to stress this no mocks because I really like that. I hate, I hate
mocking. So I'm going to just shove this down your throat. Every slide is going to be no
mocking. But you also, one thing that I think is massively important is that if anybody's
running serverless, I've been running serverless since it was a thing like in 2018 when everybody
wanted to run serverless and it was horrible, it was a horrible experience. So I'd suggest
nobody really does it. But if you have to, because of PMs, testing events on message
queues and testing events on distributed systems and services in AWS or whatever, it would
like, you never, you'd like, it's prayer driven development. You never really know what's
going to happen, right? So that's something that we provide. You can literally see the
entire trace from that ASIC message queue, from other systems, from other services, and
you really know what's happening. Obviously, it's important that you get assertions based
on timing. Maybe you want all of your database requests and your database queries to finish
within 500 milliseconds. That just works. And you can also set wildcard assertions.
So the same thing I was saying about the database queries, it works for wildcards as well. So
a visual demo, like a representation, what that would mean is literally like this. So
you have your text test executor, which is, you can think of that as a trigger. You're
testing your system. That trace data is getting written to your trace data store. It can be
pretty much anything you've all heard of. Jaeger, OpenSearch, Rufana Tempo, OpenTelemetry
Collector, like all of those, even vendors like Datadog or whatever. And then what happens
is that once the response gets back, we pick up that response, but we also pick up the
trace. So you can run assertions based on both the trace and the response itself. And
then obviously you get the result back and then you can see if it's passed, if it's not
passed, what you need to fix, et cetera. So yeah, after all of this, we're 10 minutes
in, perfect. After all of this just like theory and understanding what's happening, we want
to jump into actual code. So let's go back to the sample of checking our trace-based
test. So we have a URL and we're making sure that we're sending a get request to that URL.
We're setting up a span. So we're targeting the books span in the books API. And we're
making sure that we want to have a list of books equal to three. So this is our TDD red
green process. We have a test. We want to run the code and we see, okay, so we have
a handler here. It's getting some books. We have some books, but you can see that there's
no instrumentation. So if we do run the test, it's going to say, okay, the 200 is fine,
but we're not getting any books here. Red, let's go ahead and refactor. We're adding
in our spans. So we say, okay, so now I'll add an attribute and I want to pass in the
book's length into this attribute right here. Perfect. Now it passes. So this is the most
banal simple use case that you can see, but you're already seeing value from it because
you can pass in a custom value. That's a real, real data. You don't have to mess about with
any mocking or anything. And then obviously one thing that I'm stressing is very important
is what if you want to add a span duration? So I want all of, I want this API to finish
within 500 milliseconds. Okay. Right now, if we have an issue, even though the code
works, it might be performing badly. We can add in the span duration, check for the timing,
and then obviously refactor if we need to refactor. And that's the thing in the UI as
well. Once you do refactor it, this is what you would see. You go and say, okay, so finally
now I have a passing test. This book's API is returning within 500 milliseconds. And
then obviously the last and I think crucial thing with using trace based testing is that
you can literally test on a search on every part of an HTTP transaction. So if we go back
to our books handler API, instead of calling books, we're now calling available books.
So we are calling an external API to see if the books are available or not. So we're having
this microservice to microservice communication. And if we check that, get available books
function, so we have some promise thingamajig happening here. We're calling an availability
API and we're just checking if it's available or not. So the kicker here is we're calling
an external API. The external API is super simple. We're just running some tests, whether
it's available or not, and we're setting this attribute. So it's a very, very simple example.
But the thing is, what if in the availability check we have a problem? There we go. Oh yeah,
good, good. This is why I don't do live demos. Anyway, so if in the availability check, if
you're checking here, you can see, oh, we have a problem. There are books that are out
of stock. So this is that down the chain action that would happen. You would never know what
the hell is the problem. But now, because we have this set up, we can say, OK, so I'm
adding into my trace based test. I want to make sure the availability API is up. So I'm
actually triggering this host. And I also want to make sure that all of these is available
attributes is true. If I do run that test, I'll see that, whoopsie, I'll see that they're
all passing except for this one because, oh wait, there was actually one node, one part
of the trace, one span that was returning false because one book was out of stock. And
if you jump in here, you can see that everything is literally passing. Everything is passing
except for that one span, which is something you would never figure out if you were running
the traditional way of running tests. And the last thing I really want to stress before
we wrap up is that this will work with any distributed system that has open telemetry
instrumentation. So any system that looks like this, you have an app with open telemetry,
you're sending to the open telemetry collector, and then you're sending that trace data to
any trace data store. Jager open search doesn't really matter. You hook in your trace test
instance, you pick up data on every request, you pick up data from the trace data store,
and you run these tests. This is the only setup you really need to do. Install the CLI,
install the server, one command, one command, and you're ready. Set up your Docker composer
Kubernetes. All of this works out of the box with the install. We have good engineers.
These guys really try to make the install really simple. You set up the trace data store.
You can do that in the UI or in the CLI, doesn't really matter. Connect the data store and
you're done. It just works. So the last recap, two minutes left. What did we learn today?
We learned that obviously ODD or observability driven development is really awesome. You
don't have to mock, again with the mocking. You're testing against real data and you don't
have any black boxes anymore. You know exactly what's happening in every single microservice.
You can assert on every step of the transaction. And as a last recap, I mean, you wouldn't
be here if you thought testing was fun or easy or something that you really enjoy doing.
It is hard. Like we all know, it is very hard. Testing distributed systems is even harder.
Testing microservices is even harder. So I want to help you elevate that TDD processor.
You're already doing, you're already doing well that you like to doing ODD as well. That's
pretty much it. We're on point. If you have any questions, if you want to check out TraceTest,
just go to GitHub, CubeShop, TraceTest. You can download it. You can read a blog post
I wrote about this as well. So knock yourselves out, I guess. You can also do, just to make
it easier, you can do the, you can also jump into Discord. You can chat with me or the
engineers face to face. If you have any questions, if you want to try it out, check out the GitHub.
Also give us a star, you know, because it's kind of why I'm here. I have to earn my salary
some way. So questions?
Yeah, sure. So tests run against the trace from the system. Yes. The way it happens is
that, imagine you're running a postman request. That would be called, because this is TraceTest,
that would be called response test. You get a response, you're testing on it. For TraceTest,
you get the response, but you're also tapping into the trace data store and getting the
traces that that request generates. So from that distributed trace, then you're running
assertions based on the spans within that trace. If that answers your question.
Yeah, for sure. The only thing is that, obviously if you're running locally, you have a setup
where your application is sending to either an open telemetry collector or whatever. You
can also tap into that where you configure TraceTest to be the pipeline endpoint of your
open telemetry collector. So you can just run it as a dev tool as well. Also, we might,
I'm not sure if I'm good saying this on camera, but we might be building a desktop app very
soon because we're like half a year into this. So we're still kind of figuring out what you
guys need. So that's why I'm here as well. But yeah, let's see what happens. It's a great
question, by the way. It's good that I finished early. We have like time for questions. This
is great. So is there anything that limits this to test notices? Like, could you use
this as a way of measuring SLOs for like half the user journeys?
So yeah, the question was measuring SLOs for user journeys. That's actually something we're
working on now. I'm not sure if you know about the Captain project. So we have an integration
with the Captain project as of last week, quite literally. So if you want to check that
out, you just jump into Trace Test Integrates with Captain and you'll get a lot of documentation
and sample apps examples and whatnot to set that up as well. So that's an excellent use
case and something that we actively have been working on.
So most modern apps use a browser, which you also get to leverage your data through the
browser.
100%. The thing is that whatever you have implemented, if you have auto traces coming
in from that system, it works. So it's language agnostic, set up agnostic. It's literally
like just the traces are important. So if you're running Otel, if you're running the
Datadog agent, Elastic agent, literally anything that generates traces, it'll work. Obviously
works best with Otel because open source, you know. But yeah, it just works.
Could you use this live introduction to periodically check certain constraints, like instead of
writing custom alerting rules based on your traces, putting up these assertions and say
okay, once a day I want my samples, so you can check the assertion?
So if I understand the question correctly, it is do I run synthetic tests with Trace
test? Yes. If you have a CI pipeline or like you can have a cron job somewhere running,
it doesn't really matter, every five minutes I want to trigger this test and make sure
that all of the assertions are true. That's perfectly fine.
No, but my question was more if I have trace data for my production system, can I use trace
test to play with these states?
Oh yeah, 100%. It works. You can think of it as testing in production and making sure
that the production environment is healthy. That works as well.
Hi. So the trace test depend on your instrumentation, right? Your instrumentation is in your production
code. Do you have any advice on how do you prevent your production code from bloating
with the instrumentation to beat these tests?
I'm going to say that's a great question, but I think I'm not even close to being good
enough of an engineer to answer that question, to be honest.
If we could pass it on to the team? 100%, 100%.
Because this looks like a really useful tool, but...
Right.
I'm sure.
Thank you.
Okay, who's next?
Yeah, go ahead.
Yeah, this is quite a massive question.
But it looks like you really can pick black boxes, but another hand, right in the past
like this, and that's the span they might be necessarily tapping into the intricate
details of the infrastructure. So is this necessarily good? Because the text actually
knows what's in that black box. So when you refactor your infrastructure, you might have
to throw out all your tests because you don't have the database in your test.
Yeah, that's a good question as well. I think the logical solution would be trace test is
like a map, is just mapping out your infra. So if you're using it, you can also use it
just to gain visibility. So it doesn't have to be that it's only focused on the testing.
If you're using it to map out your infra, even if you have changes, if you're running
the test again, you'll exactly know what changed. So if you're running assertions based on one
database table, so to say, and then running an API on one endpoint that has one particular
host name, if you change those up, you'll see what fails and you can figure out, oh,
okay, so we changed that last week because of XYZ and you can know exactly what changed.
So I think the overview, the visibility into your system, because when you're running microservices,
when you're running a bunch of stuff, distributed systems, whatever, it's just hard to have
a mental model, a mind map, so to say, of everything that's happening. So I think that's
a good part of the value there as well.
Thank you. No more time.
Yeah.